docs: add CONTRIBUTING.md for external contributors (#26851)
trezor/trezor-suite: CONTRIBUTING.md

    > The Node version must stay consistent with `suite-native/app/eas.json`.
- **Yarn** — the version is pinned in the `packageManager` field of the root
  [`package.json`](package.json). Yarn is vendored via `.yarn/` and Corepack, so
  running `yarn` in the repo root uses the correct version automatically.
- **Git LFS** — required for binary assets. Install per
  [Git LFS docs](https://git-lfs.com) (on Debian/Ubuntu:
  `sudo apt-get install git-lfs`).
- **Git submodules** — the repo uses submodules; initialise them after cloning.

### Clone & initial setup

```bash
git clone https://github.com/trezor/trezor-suite.git
cd trezor-suite

# Use the pinned Node version
nvm install

# Initialise submodules & LFS (run once per clone)
git submodule update --init --recursive
git lfs install
git lfs pull

# Install dependencies
yarn
# If Playwright post-install fails, use: yarn --mode=skip-build

# Build essential libraries (required before running any app; ~3–5 min)
yarn build:essential
```

> **Tip:** `git config --global submodule.recurse true` makes submodules update
> automatically with normal `git pull` / `git checkout`.

**Platform notes**

> - **Windows:** use Git Bash (not cmd or PowerShell); WSL2 is recommended for
>   performance.

Reviewer: No it's not. It's an alternative, but long abandoned, unclear if it still works.
```suggestion
- **Windows:** use Git Bash (not cmd or PowerShell)
```

| Suite desktop (Electron)                    | `yarn suite:dev:desktop`                    |
| Suite mobile (React Native / Expo)          | `yarn native:start` _(plus platform steps)_ |
| Suite web — production build preview        | `yarn suite:build:web:preview`              |

You **do not need a physical Trezor device** to develop: use the
[`trezor/trezor-user-env`](https://github.com/trezor/trezor-user-env) emulator.

For mobile (iOS / Android) you need additional native tooling; follow the mobile
setup steps in the README before running `yarn native:start`.

**Optional local config:** copy `env.local.example` to `.env.local` in the repo
root. Setting `TANSTACK_REACT_QUERY_DEV_TOOLS=true` enables React Query Devtools
on localhost.

## Code quality requirements

Every PR must pass a set of automated checks. You can (and should) run them
locally before pushing.

| Check                                      | Command                | Enforced by              |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------- | ------------------------ |
| TypeScript type-check                      | `yarn type-check`      | `check-code-validation`  |

> | ESLint (JS/TS)                             | `yarn lint:js`         | `check-code-validation`  |

Reviewer: Technically true, but I recommend to use only the fix command for Nx caching.
```suggestion
| ESLint (JS/TS)                             | `yarn lint:js:fix`     | `check-code-validation`  |
```

| Stylelint (CSS-in-JS)                      | `yarn lint:styles`     | `check-code-validation`  |
| Prettier formatting                        | `yarn format:verify`   | `check-code-validation`  |
| Shell script validation (shellcheck)       | `yarn lint:shellcheck` | `check-shell-validation` |
| Unit tests                                 | `yarn test:unit`       | `check-test-health`      |
| Dependency hygiene                         | `yarn depcheck`        | `check-code-validation`  |

> | Project references / workspace resolutions | `yarn validate`        | `check-code-validation`  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Project references / workspace resolutions | `yarn refs`            | `check-code-validation`  |
```

| CodeQL security analysis                   | _(runs in CI)_         | `check-codeql-analysis`  |

A single convenience command to run most local validation at once:

```bash
yarn validate
```

**Autofix before you push:**

```bash
yarn lint:js:fix
yarn format
```

**Husky hooks** (`.husky/pre-commit`) run lint and formatting on staged files
automatically. Do not bypass them unless you have a very good reason
(`--no-verify`).

### General style & design rules

We follow a set of conventions documented as "skills" in the
[`skills/`](skills/) directory. The most relevant ones for contributors are
summarised in [Project conventions & skills](#project-conventions--skills) below.
In short:

- **TypeScript first** — prefer explicit types over `any`; exhaustive checks for
  discriminated unions.
- **Named exports**, organised imports.
- **Functional React components** with hooks; keep components small and
  co-locate files per component.
- **Redux Toolkit** for state where Redux is already used.
- **No silent catches** — handle errors defensively or propagate them.

## Testing

> - **Framework:** Jest (runs via `yarn test:unit`, `yarn test:unit:suite`,
>   `yarn test:unit:native`, `yarn test:unit:all`).

Reviewer: The other commands are for CI optimization or maintenance, but this is the only one you need for development.
```suggestion
- **Framework:** Jest (runs via `yarn test:unit`).
```

- **Location:** tests live in `__tests__/` folders next to the code they cover,
  with a `.test.ts` / `.test.tsx` extension. Type-only tests use the
  `.type-test.ts` suffix so Jest does not execute them.
- **Fixtures:** placed in a `mocks/` folder at the **package root** (not inside
  `src/`), with a `mock` prefix in file names.
- **Translations in tests:** when asserting UI text, look strings up by their
  translation ID (`getTranslation('path.to.key')`) rather than hard-coded
  English. This prevents Crowdin sync PRs from breaking your tests. Hard-coded
  text is acceptable only when the exact wording is intentionally load-bearing
  and must not change without review.

> - **E2E:** Suite has web (`build-suite-web-e2e`), desktop
>   (`build-suite-desktop-e2e`) and native (`build-suite-native-adhoc`) E2E
>   pipelines. For most PRs you do not need to run E2E locally — CI will do it.

Reviewer: Build commands are useless on their own, the setup is more involved than that.
So it's better to link the documentation 🙂 
```suggestion
- **E2E:** Suite has web, desktop and native E2E pipelines. For most PRs you do not need to run E2E locally, as it runs in CI, but in case you do, refer to the documentation for [web & desktop](./suite/e2e/docs/e2e-playwright-suite.md) and for [native](./suite-native/app/e2e/README.md). 
```

- **CI flakiness** is tracked via `check-test-health-nightly`. If you think a
  failure is a flake, re-run the job; if it flakes repeatedly, mention it in the
  PR so maintainers can investigate.

## Commit messages

We use [**Conventional Commits**](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/)
and this is **enforced by CI** (`check-commit-message.yml`). See
[`COMMITS.md`](COMMITS.md) for the canonical rules and the optional local
`commit-msg` hook.

**Format:**

```
<type>(<scope>): <short description>

[optional body]

[optional footer — e.g. "Closes #1234"]
```

> **Allowed types:** `build`, `ci`, `docs`, `feat`, `fix`, `perf`, `refactor`,
> `style`, `test`, `chore`, `revert`.

Reviewer: Tiny nit: I'd sort first the types that we actually use most often 🙂 
```suggestion
**Allowed types:** `feat`, `fix`, `chore`, `refactor`, `ci`, `test`, `docs`, `style`, `perf`, `build`, `revert`.
```

**Common scopes:** `suite`, `suite-native`, `connect`, `components`, `analytics`,
plus package-specific scopes.

**Good examples:**

```
feat(suite): add transaction history CSV export
fix(components): correct modal z-index on Safari
docs: clarify Git LFS requirement in README
chore(deps): bump eslint to 9.x
```

**Further rules:**

- One logical change per commit where practical.

> - Reference issues in the body (`Closes #1234`, `Refs #5678`).

Reviewer: hallucination. We don't do this, ever.
Only PRs can merge commits into `develop`, and so only PRs close issues 
```suggestion
```

> - `Revert ...` and `fixup! ...` commits skip the format check.

Reviewer: fixup actually fails the check, which forces you to rebase before merging 🙂 
```suggestion
- `Revert ...` commits skip the format check.
```

- If you need to break the format during local WIP, squash or rewrite before
  opening the PR.

## Pull request workflow

1. **Fork** the repository and create your branch from `develop` (the default
   branch). Use a descriptive branch name, e.g.
   `feat/suite-export-history` or `fix/mobile-keyboard-overlay`.

> 2. **Keep your branch up to date** with `develop`. Prefer rebase for clean
>    history, merge if the diff is complex.

Reviewer: no merging
```suggestion
2. **Keep your branch up to date** with `develop` by rebasing on it, merge commits are not allowed.
```

   completely:
    - **Description** — what and why (not just _what_).
    - **Notes for QA** — steps, edge cases, affected areas, known side-effects,
      or anything QA should _not_ need to test. This section matters: QA is a
      required stage before release.
    - **Related Issue** — link it (`Resolve #1234`) so automation can close it.
    - **Screenshots / screen recordings** — mandatory for any visible UI change.
4. **Mark as Draft** while you are still iterating. Switch to _Ready for review_
   once CI is green and you want human eyes on it.
5. **Wait for CI.** All required checks must pass:
   `check-code-validation`, `check-commit-message`, `check-codeql-analysis`,
   `check-project-assignment`, `check-shell-validation`, and the relevant
   `build-*` / `check-test-health` jobs. Flakes do happen — a maintainer can
   re-run failed jobs on external PRs.
6. **Respond to review comments.** Push follow-up commits; do **not** force-push
   during review (it breaks reviewer diffs). A maintainer will squash on merge
   if needed.
7. **QA.** Once approved, a PR is labelled for QA. Keep the branch available for
   testing until it is merged.

> 8. **Merge.** Maintainers merge PRs; external contributors do not have merge
>    rights. The PR title becomes the squash commit message, so it must also
>    follow Conventional Commits format.

Reviewer: no squashing. While it's somewhat customary in our repo that titles have PR titles in the same conventional format, it's neither required nor universally observed. 
```suggestion
8. **Merge.** Maintainers merge PRs; external contributors do not have merge
   rights.
```

**What to avoid**

- Large, multi-purpose PRs — they will be asked to split.
- Unrelated reformatting or "drive-by" refactors inside a feature PR.
- Committing **build artefacts** (`dist/`, `build/`, compiled `.js` / `.d.ts`
  next to `.ts` sources, `tsconfig.tsbuildinfo`, `coverage/`, `.nx/cache/`,
  `storybook-static/`, native build dirs like `ios/Pods/` or `android/.gradle/`),
  **`node_modules`**, unintentional **lockfile** (`yarn.lock`) changes, or
  secrets / `.env.local` contents. Auto-generated sources that _are_ tracked
  (e.g. output of `yarn update-project-references`, Crowdin-synced locale
  files) should be committed by the right PR — the Crowdin sync bot's PR, or
  a dedicated chore PR — not rolled into a feature PR.

## Reporting issues

Use the correct template from
[`.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/`](.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/):

- **Suite issue** — general product issue.
- **Suite bug** — a reproducible bug. Include: Suite version, OS, device model &
  firmware, reproduction steps, expected vs actual behaviour, and logs /
  screenshots where possible.
- **Code improvement proposal** — refactors, dev-experience improvements.

> - **Dependency maintenance task** — upgrade / replace / remove a dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dependency maintenance task** — used only _internally_ by maintainers for regular tasks. 
```
